<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Table of Contents</title>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter">
		<nav epub:type="toc">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Table of Contents</h2>
			<ol>
				<li>
					<a href="text/titlepage.xhtml">Titlepage</a>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/imprint.xhtml">Imprint</a>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/chapter-1.xhtml"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>: Treats of the Place Where Oliver Twist Was Born and of the Circumstances Attending His Birth</a>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/chapter-2.xhtml"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>: Treats of Oliver Twist’s Growth, Education, and Board</a>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/chapter-3.xhtml"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>: Relates How Oliver Twist Was Very Near Getting a Place Which Would Not Have Been a Sinecure</a>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/chapter-4.xhtml"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>: Oliver, Being Offered Another Place, Makes His First Entry Into Public Life</a>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/chapter-5.xhtml"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>: Oliver Mingles with New Associates. Going to a Funeral for the First Time, He Forms an Unfavourable Notion of His Master’s Business</a>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/chapter-6.xhtml"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>: Oliver, Being Goaded by the Taunts of Noah, Rouses Into Action, and Rather Astonishes Him</a>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/chapter-7.xhtml"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>: Oliver Continues Refractory</a>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/chapter-8.xhtml"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>: Oliver Walks to London. He Encounters on the Road a Strange Sort of Young Gentleman</a>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/chapter-9.xhtml"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span>: Containing Further Particulars Concerning the Pleasant Old Gentleman, and His Hopeful Pupils</a>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/chapter-10.xhtml"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span>: Oliver Becomes Better Acquainted with the Characters of His New Associates; and Purchases Experience at a High Price. Being a Short, but Very Important Chapter, in This History</a>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/chapter-11.xhtml"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">XI</span>: Treats of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fang the Police Magistrate; and Furnishes a Slight Specimen of His Mode of Administering Justice</a>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/chapter-12.xhtml"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">XII</span>: In Which Oliver Is Taken Better Care of Than He Ever Was Before. And in Which the Narrative Reverts to the Merry Old Gentleman and His Youthful Friends</a>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/chapter-13.xhtml"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIII</span>: Some New Acquaintances Are Introduced to the Intelligent Reader, Connected with Whom Various Pleasant Matters Are Related, Appertaining to This History</a>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/chapter-14.xhtml"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIV</span>: Comprising Further Particulars of Oliver’s Stay at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Brownlow’s, with the Remarkable Prediction Which One <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Grimwig Uttered Concerning Him, When He Went Out on an Errand</a>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/chapter-15.xhtml"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">XV</span>: Showing How Very Fond of Oliver Twist, the Merry Old Jew and Miss Nancy Were</a>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/chapter-16.xhtml"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVI</span>: Relates What Became of Oliver Twist, After He Had Been Claimed by Nancy</a>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/chapter-17.xhtml"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVII</span>: Oliver’s Destiny Continuing Unpropitious, Brings a Great Man to London to Injure His Reputation</a>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/chapter-18.xhtml"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVIII</span>: How Oliver Passed His Time in the Improving Society of His Reputable Friends</a>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/chapter-19.xhtml"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIX</span>: In Which a Notable Plan Is Discussed and Determined On</a>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/chapter-20.xhtml"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">XX</span>: Wherein Oliver Is Delivered Over to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> William Sikes</a>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/chapter-21.xhtml"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXI</span>: The Expedition</a>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/chapter-22.xhtml"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXII</span>: The Burglary</a>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/chapter-23.xhtml"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIII</span>: Which Contains the Substance of a Pleasant Conversation Between <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bumble and a Lady; and Shows That Even a Beadle May Be Susceptible on Some Points</a>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/chapter-24.xhtml"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIV</span>: Treats on a Very Poor Subject. But Is a Short One, and May Be Found of Importance in This History</a>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/chapter-25.xhtml"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXV</span>: Wherein This History Reverts to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fagin and Company</a>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/chapter-26.xhtml"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXVI</span>: In Which a Mysterious Character Appears Upon the Scene; and Many Things, Inseparable from This History, Are Done and Performed</a>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/chapter-27.xhtml"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXVII</span>: Atones for the Unpoliteness of a Former Chapter; Which Deserted a Lady, Most Unceremoniously</a>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/chapter-28.xhtml"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXVIII</span>: Looks After Oliver, and Proceeds with His Adventures</a>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/chapter-29.xhtml"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIX</span>: Has an Introductory Account of the Inmates of the House, to Which Oliver Resorted</a>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/chapter-30.xhtml"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXX</span>: Relates What Oliver’s New Visitors Thought of Him</a>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/chapter-31.xhtml"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXI</span>: Involves a Critical Position</a>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/chapter-32.xhtml"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXII</span>: Of the Happy Life Oliver Began to Lead with His Kind Friends</a>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/chapter-33.xhtml"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXIII</span>: Wherein the Happiness of Oliver and His Friends, Experiences a Sudden Check</a>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/chapter-34.xhtml"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXIV</span>: Contains Some Introductory Particulars Relative to a Young Gentleman Who Now Arrives Upon the Scene; and a New Adventure Which Happened to Oliver</a>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/chapter-35.xhtml"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXV</span>: Containing the Unsatisfactory Result of Oliver’s Adventure; and a Conversation of Some Importance Between Harry Maylie and Rose</a>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/chapter-36.xhtml"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXVI</span>: Is a Very Short One, and May Appear of No Great Importance in Its Place, but It Should Be Read Notwithstanding, as a Sequel to the Last, and a Key to One That Will Follow When Its Time Arrives</a>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/chapter-37.xhtml"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXVII</span>: In Which the Reader May Perceive a Contrast, Not Uncommon in Matrimonial Cases</a>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/chapter-38.xhtml"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXVIII</span>: Containing an Account of What Passed Between <abbr>Mr.</abbr> and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bumble, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Monks, at Their Nocturnal Interview</a>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/chapter-39.xhtml"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXIX</span>: Introduces Some Respectable Characters with Whom the Reader Is Already Acquainted, and Shows How Monks and the Jew Laid Their Worthy Heads Together</a>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/chapter-40.xhtml"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">XL</span>: A Strange Interview, Which Is a Sequel to the Last Chapter</a>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/chapter-41.xhtml"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">XLI</span>: Containing Fresh Discoveries, and Showing That Surprises, Like Misfortunes, Seldom Come Alone</a>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/chapter-42.xhtml"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">XLII</span>: An Old Acquaintance of Oliver’s, Exhibiting Decided Marks of Genius, Becomes a Public Character in the Metropolis</a>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/chapter-43.xhtml"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">XLIII</span>: Wherein Is Shown How the Artful Dodger Got Into Trouble</a>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/chapter-44.xhtml"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">XLIV</span>: The Time Arrives for Nancy to Redeem Her Pledge to Rose Maylie. She Fails</a>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/chapter-45.xhtml"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">XLV</span>: Noah Claypole Is Employed by Fagin on a Secret Mission</a>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/chapter-46.xhtml"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">XLVI</span>: The Appointment Kept</a>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/chapter-47.xhtml"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">XLVII</span>: Fatal Consequences</a>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/chapter-48.xhtml"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">XLVIII</span>: The Flight of Sikes</a>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/chapter-49.xhtml"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">XLIX</span>: Monks and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Brownlow at Length Meet. Their Conversation, and the Intelligence That Interrupts It</a>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/chapter-50.xhtml"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">L</span>: The Pursuit and Escape</a>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/chapter-51.xhtml"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">LI</span>: Affording an Explanation of More Mysteries Than One, and Comprehending a Proposal of Marriage with No Word of Settlement or Pin-Money</a>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/chapter-52.xhtml"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">LII</span>: Fagin’s Last Night Alive</a>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/chapter-53.xhtml"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">LIII</span>: And Last</a>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/endnotes.xhtml">Endnotes</a>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/colophon.xhtml">Colophon</a>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/uncopyright.xhtml">Uncopyright</a>
				</li>
			</ol>
		</nav>
		<nav epub:type="landmarks">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Landmarks</h2>
			<ol>
				<li>
					<a href="text/chapter-1.xhtml" epub:type="bodymatter">Oliver Twist</a>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/endnotes.xhtml" epub:type="backmatter endnotes">Endnotes</a>
				</li>
			</ol>
		</nav>
	</body>
</html>
